drugs law enforcement and foreign policy
a report prepared by the Subcommittee on
terrorism narcotics and international
operations of the Committee on Foreign
Relations United States Senate December
1988 printed for the use of the
Committee on Foreign Relations US
Government Printing Office Washington
1989 Committee on Foreign Relations
Claiborne Pell Rhode Island chairman
Joseph R Biden Jr Delaware Jesse Helms
North Carolina
Paul s sarbanes Maryland Richard G lugar
Indiana Alan Cranston California Nancy L
Kassebaum Kansas
Christopher J Dodd Connecticut Rudy
Boschwitz Minnesota John F Kerry
Massachusetts Larry Pressler South
Dakota Paul Simon Illinois Frank H
Murkowski Alaska Terry Sanford North
Carolina
Paul s Tribble jr. Virginia Brock Adams
Washington Daniel J Evans Washington
Daniel P Moynihan New York Mitch
McConnell Kentucky
Gerald be Christianson staff director
James P Lussier minority staff director
Subcommittee on terrorism narcotics and
international operations John F Kerry
Massachusetts Chairman Barak Adams
Washington Mitch McConnell Kentucky
Daniel P Moynihan New York Frank H
Murkowski Alaska letter of transmittal
US Senate Committee on Foreign Relations
Washington DC April 13 1989 honourable
Claiborne Pell chairman Committee on
Foreign Relations US Senate Washington
DC
dear mr. chairman two years ago you
directed the Subcommittee on narcotics
terrorism and international operations
to conduct an investigation regarding
the links between foreign policy
narcotics and law enforcement in
connection with drug trafficking from
the Caribbean and Central and South
America to the United States this report
is the final written product of that
investigation in the 100th Congress
pursuant to your direction the
subcommittee conducted 14 days of open
hearings nine executive sessions and
received testimony from 27 witnesses in
addition the staff deposed an additional
20 witnesses 30 subpoenas were issued
many calling for the production of
extensive documentation the
subcommittee's investigations resulted
in a wide-ranging review of past
policies and practices and handling
foreign policy and the war on drugs it
is our privilege to transmit the report
containing findings and conclusions
based on the investigation a
country-by-country analysis of the drug
problem as it has affected u.s. foreign
policy in Latin America a review of drug
links to the Contra movement and the
Nicaraguan war of money-laundering
and of issues involving conflicts
between law enforcement and national
security appendices to the report detail
allegations of how the committee's
initial investigation in 1986 may have
been interfered with we very much
appreciate the support and assistance
you have given us throughout the course
of this investigation I would like to
note our personal appreciation for the
efforts of the personnel who handled
this investigation Special Counsel
Jackie bloom kathleen smith and jonathon
Litchman of the committee staff and
Richard McCall Jonathan Winer and David
McKean of Senator Kerry's personal staff
along with Senator Kerry's former
administrative assistant Ron Rosenbluth
this report would not have been possible
without their dedicated work the
subcommittee believes that this
investigation has
straighted that the drug cartels pose a
continuing threat to national security
at home and abroad and that the United
States has too often in the past allowed
other foreign policy objectives to
interfere with the war on drugs the
subcommittee hopes that this report will
contribute to better understanding by
the Congress of this problem and to
constructive legislative proposals which
may allow us to avoid repeating the
mistakes of the past Sincerely Yours
John Kerry Chairman Brock Adams Daniel P
Moynihan executive summary and
conclusions the American people must
understand much better than they ever
have in the past how our safety and that
of our children is threatened by Latin
drug conspiracies which are dramatically
more successful at subversion in the
United States than any that are centered
in Moscow that warning was delivered in
subcommittee testimony by General Paul C
Gorman now retired and formerly head of
the u.s. Southern Command in Panama such
a characterization coming from an
individual who served with such
distinction in the United States Army
should not be taken lightly there should
not be any doubt in anyone's mind that
the United States is engaged in a war
directed at our citizens the old the
young the rich the poor each day with
what has become a numbing regularity the
American people are besieged with the
news of the latest casualties in the
drug war the Colombian drug cartels
which control the cocaine industry
constitute an unprecedented threat in a
non-traditional sense to the national
security of the United States well-armed
and operating from secure foreign havens
the cartels are responsible for
thousands of murders and drug-related
deaths in the United States each year
they exact enormous costs in terms of
violence lower economic productivity
and misery across the nation the
American criminal justice system has
been overwhelmed by the drug war to date
most of the US law enforcement efforts
have been directed at the domestic drug
distribution network
the result is a criminal justice system
swamped with cases which cannot be
processed fast enough jails that are
overflowing with prisoners a greater
influx of cocaine then when the war on
drugs was declared in 1983 and a cheaper
higher-quality product as a recent study
sponsored by the criminal justice
section of the American Bar Association
noted quote a major problem reported by
all criminal justice participants is the
inability of the criminal justice system
to control the drug problem through the
enforcement of the criminal law police
prosecutors and judges told the
committee that they have been
unsuccessful in making a significant
impact on the importation sale and use
of illegal drugs despite devoting much
of their resources to the arrest
prosecution and trial of drug offenders
end quote
attempts to interdict the flow of drugs
at the border while important has
experienced only marginal success
according to US officials in the
vanguard of the war on drugs at best
interdiction results in the seizures of
only 15 percent of the illegal narcotics
coming into the country for the drug
cartels whose production capabilities
stagger the imagination a 15 percent
loss rate is more than acceptable demand
reduction through education and
rehabilitation are critical elements in
the war on drugs but most experts
acknowledge that even this strategy will
require a considerable period of time
before major inroads are made in to
significantly reducing cocaine usage in
this country the narcotics problem is a
national security and foreign policy
issue of significant proportions the
drug cartels are so large and powerful
that they have undermined some
governments
taken over others in our hemisphere they
work with revolutionaries and terrorists
they have demonstrated the power to
corrupt military and civilian
institutions alike
their objectives seriously jeopardized
US foreign policy interests and
objectives throughout Latin America and
the Caribbean the subcommittee
investigation has led to the following
conclusions and recommendations past
failures in the past the United States
government has either failed to
acknowledge or underestimated the
seriousness of the emerging threat to
national security posed by the drug
cartels the reasons for this failure
should be examined by the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence in concert
with the Senate Committee on Foreign
Relations to determine what corrective
steps should be taken in some instances
foreign policy considerations interfered
with the USS ability to fight the war on
drugs foreign policy priorities towards
the Bahamas Honduras Nicaragua and
Panama at times delayed halted or
interfered with US law enforcement
efforts to keep narcotics out of the
United States in a few cases within the
United States drug traffickers sought to
manipulate the US judicial system by
providing services in support of u.s.
foreign policy with varying results
US officials involved in Central America
failed to address the drug issue for
fear of jeopardizing the war efforts
against Nicaragua the war against
Nicaragua contributed to weakening and
already inadequate law enforcement
capability in the region which was
exploited easily by a variety of
mercenaries pilots and others involved
in drug smuggling the subcommittee did
not find that the contra leaders
personally were involved in drug
trafficking there was substantial
evidence of drug smuggling through the
war zones on the part of individual
Contras contra suppliers contra pilots
mercenaries who worked with the Contras
and Contras supporters throughout the
region
the saga of Panama's general Manuel
Antonio Noriega represents one of the
most serious foreign policy failures for
the United States throughout the 1970s
and 1980s Noriega was able to manipulate
US policy toward his country while
skillfully accumulating near absolute
power in Panama it is clear that each US
government agency which had a
relationship with Noriega turned a blind
eye to his corruption and drug dealing
even as he was emerging as a key player
on behalf of the Medellin Cartel policy
and priorities international drug
trafficking organizations are a threat
to US national security our government
must first acknowledge that the
activities of the drug cartels
constitute a threat of such magnitude
and then establish a more coherent and
consistent strategy for dealing with the
problem the threat posed by the drug
cartels should be given a major priority
in the bilateral agenda of the US with a
number of countries including the
Bahamas
Haiti Colombia Bolivia and Paraguay it
should be among the most important
issues with a number of other countries
including Mexico and Honduras in order
to signal to other countries the
seriousness with which the United States
regards the drug issue the president
should convene a summit meeting of Latin
American leaders to begin developing a
strategy to deal with this issue and
related economic problems narcotics law
enforcement has often taken a backseat
to other diplomatic and national
security priorities the war on drugs
must not in the future be sacrificed
to other foreign policy considerations
administrator
recommendations the Treasury Department
should begin negotiations on gathering
information on large foreign US dollar
deposits as authorized by the 1988
omnibus drug bill the State Department
should make a special effort to control
multiple entry visas from countries
which are major drug transit countries
or which harbours major drug
organizations the Federal Aviation
Administration should undertake a major
effort to inspect hundreds of
substandard aircraft many of which are
used for smuggling illegal narcotics
these aircraft are located throughout
the United States and those which do not
meet FAA specifications should be
grounded immediately individuals who
represent themselves as working for the
CIA or other national security agencies
of the United States government and who
in fact do not should be prosecuted
promptly to the full extent of the law
all US law enforcement agencies should
devote significantly greater attention
to counterintelligence in order to
prevent drug traffickers from
penetrating their operations the
existing distrust among law enforcement
agencies working on the drug problem and
national security agencies must be
resolved ways must be found to make it
possible for law enforcement agencies to
have access to national security
intelligence information related to the
drug threat federal salaries of senior
prosecutors and investigators must be
raised and special senior executive
service positions created in order to
encourage the most talented and
experienced personnel to remain on the
job specific legislative recommendations
the president
given a series of optional sanctions to
apply to major drug producing and drug
transit countries which have not fully
cooperated with the US and drug
enforcement efforts this would allow the
president to certify a nation under the
national security provision of for 8 1
h2 a12 and thus avoid the mandatory
sanctions contained in current law while
still giving him other optional
sanctions the proposed sanctions would
include prohibiting ships that have
stopped at such a nation within 60 days
from discharging passengers or cargo in
the u.s. denying landing rights in the
u.s. to the national airlines of such a
nation subjecting goods and containers
from any such nation to special
inspections quarantines or other
additional regulations to prevent them
from being used to transport prohibited
substances to the United States denying
or limiting non-immigrant visas to
Nationals of any such nation eliminating
customs preclearance agreements with any
such nation no government employee or
official with responsibility for
narcotics issues and either the
executive or legislative branches of
government should be permitted to
represent a foreign government on
narcotics matters for a period of three
years after they leave the penalties for
violating such a prohibition should be
the same as for violations of the
federal regulation of lobbying Act of
1946 the Department of State should be
required to notify the Congress within
10 days whenever it denies a request
from law enforcement for reasons of
national security or foreign policy the
notification should include a full
description of the reasons for the
refusal past decisions by the Department
of State to end law enforcement
operations on such grounds should have
been subject to congressional review
this provision would ensure that
Congress remain in a position to
exercise oversight over such decisions
the Department of
State should be prohibited from entering
into contracts with any individual or
company under indictment or convicted of
any narcotics related offenses including
money laundering the department should
be required to institute procedures by
which it would routinely check with the
FBI customs and DEA to determine whether
a company or individual is under
investigation before the department
enters into any contract with the
company or individual no US intelligence
agency should be permitted to make any
payments to any person convicted of
narcotics related offenses except as
authorized in writing by the Attorney
General in connection with the
investigation or prosecution of criminal
activity the Neutrality Act should be
amended to apply only to actions which
are not specifically authorized by the
State Department each such authorization
would require prompt notification by the
State Department to the House and Senate
Foreign Affairs and Foreign Relations
committees and Senate committees on
Intelligence the annual drug
certification report should be required
to review links between international
narcotics trafficking money laundering
and international terrorism including
guerrilla groups on the right and the
left with regard to ideology the
National Director of narcotics policy
should be required to report to the
Congress on current u.s. federal
personnel practices affecting all
persons engaged in the war on drugs to
determine whether adequate resources are
being devoted to hiring training
promotion and retention of federal
employees responsible for narcotics
matters
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you